The President:
Each and every day
in this country,
Americans are grappling with
health care premiums that are
growing three times the rate
of wages and insurance company
policies that limit coverage
and raise out-of-pocket costs.
Thousands are losing their
insurance coverage each day.
Without real reform, the burdens
on America's families and
businesses will
continue to multiply.
We've had a vigorous debate
about health insurance reform,
and rightly so.
This is an issue of vital
concern to every American,
and I'm glad that
so many are engaged.
But it also should
be an honest debate,
not one dominated by willful
misrepresentations and outright
distortions, spread by the very
folks who would benefit the most
by keeping things
exactly as they are.
So today, I want to spend a few
minutes debunking some of the
more outrageous myths
circulating on the internet,
on cable TV, and repeated at some town halls across this country.
Let's start with the false claim
that illegal immigrants will get
health insurance under reform.
That's not true.
Illegal immigrants
would not be covered.
That idea has never
even been on the table.
Some are also saying that
coverage for abortions would be
mandated under reform.
Also false.
When it comes to the current
ban on using tax dollars for
abortions, nothing will
change under reform.
And as every credible person
who has looked into it has said,
there are no so-called
"death panels" --
an offensive notion to me
and to the American people.
These are phony claims
meant to divide us.
And we've all heard the charge
that reform will somehow bring
about a government
takeover of health care.
I know that sounds
scary to many folks.
It sounds scary to me, too.
But here's the
thing: it's not true.
I no sooner want government to
get between you and your doctor
than I want insurance companies
to make arbitrary decisions
about what medical care is
best for you, as they do today.
As I've said from the beginning,
under the reform we seek,
if you like your doctor,
you can keep your doctor.
If you like your private
health insurance plan,
you can keep your plan.
Period.
Now, the source of a lot of
these fears about government-run
health care is confusion over
what's called the public option.
This is one idea among many to
provide more competition and
choice, especially in the many
places around the country where
just one insurer thoroughly
dominates the marketplace.
This alternative would have to
operate as any other insurer,
on the basis of the
premiums it collects.
And let me repeat -- it
would just be an option;
those who prefer their private insurers would be under no
obligation to shift
to a public plan.
The insurance companies and
their allies don't like this
idea, or any that would
promote greater competition.
I get that.
And I expect there would be a
lot of discussion about it when
Congress returns.
But this one aspect of the
health care debate shouldn't
overshadow the other important
steps we can and must take to
reduce the increasing burdens
families and businesses face.
So let me stress them again:
If you don't have insurance,
you will finally have access to
quality coverage you can afford.
If you do have coverage, you
will benefit from more security
and more stability when it
comes to your insurance.
If you move, lose your
job, or change jobs,
you will not have to worry
about losing health coverage.
And we will set up tough
consumer protections that will
hold insurance companies
accountable and stop them from
exploiting you with
unfair practices.
We'll prohibit insurance
companies from denying coverage
because of a person's
medical history.
They will not be able to drop
your coverage if you get sick.
They will not be able to water
down your coverage when you need it most.
They will no longer be able to
place some arbitrary cap on the
amount of coverage you can
receive in a given year or a lifetime.
We'll place a limit on how
much you can be charged for
out-of-pocket expenses, because
no one in America should go
broke because they get sick.
And we will require insurance
companies to cover routine
checkups and preventive
care, like mammograms and colonoscopies.
There's no reason we shouldn't
be catching diseases like breast
cancer and colon cancer
on the front end.
That makes sense,
it saves lives,
and it will also save
money over the long-run.
Taken together, the reforms
we're seeking will help bring
down skyrocketing costs, which
will mean real savings for
families, businesses,
and government.
We know what a failure to act
would bring: More of the same.
More of the same
exploding costs.
diminished coverage.
If we fail to act,
the crisis will grow.
More families will
go without coverage.
More businesses will be forced
to drop or water down their plans.
So we can push off the day of
reckoning and fail to deal with
the flaws in the system,
just as Washington has done,
year after year,
decade after decade.
Or we can take steps that will
provide every American family
and business a measure of
security and stability that they
lack today.
It's never been easy,
moving this nation forward.
There are always
those who oppose it,
and those who use
fear to block change.
But what has always
distinguished America is that
when all the arguments
have been heard,
and all the concerns
have been voiced,
and the time comes to
do what must be done,
we rise above our differences,
grasp each others' hands,
and march forward as one
nation and one people,
some of us Democrats,
some of us Republicans,
all of us Americans.
This is our chance
to march forward.
I can't promise you that the
reforms we seek will be perfect
or make a difference overnight.
But I can promise you this: if
we pass health insurance reform,
we will look back many
years from now and say,
this was the moment we summoned
what's best in each of us to
make life better for all of us.
This was the moment when we
built a health care system
worthy of the nation
and the people we love.
This was the moment we earned
our place alongside the greatest generations.
And that is what our generation
of Americans is called to do right now.